<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 9</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2>Chapter 9: Book Reviews</h2>
				<h3>1950⁠–⁠1951<br/>(The Hopi⁠–⁠Debs⁠–⁠Mother Jones⁠–⁠Gandhi⁠–⁠1950⁠–⁠1951 Phoenix)</h3>
			</header>
			<p>I have reviewed hundreds of books, in radical publications, during the last twenty-five years. The work it takes to make notes and get the sense of the book, and then review it, takes scores of hours, but if it does nothing else, it does digest it clearly in my mind. I am including reviews of books on the Hopi, and of the lives of Debs, Gandhi, and Mother Jones, not only because these subjects are important for those in the world who seek to understand the spiritual rather than the material approach to life, but because they have been very important in my understanding and development.</p>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>The Hopi</h3>
				<h4>Reviewed in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Catholic Worker</i></h4>
				<p>Laura Thompson, the wife of John Collier, former Indian Commissioner, wrote a book, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Hopi Way</i>, in collaboration with Alice Joseph. This is the authorative book on the Hopi. Much of the material in this book is also included in her new book, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Culture in Crisis, a study of the Hopi Indians</i> (Harpers, $4.00). John Collier says in the introduction: “For our world is in crisis stern and as obscure as that of the Hopi Indian Tribe, and an aspect of that crisis is the dissolution of the human bonds and the sinking of faiths and values which are from of old … The Hopi are in crisis. In crisis too are ethnic communities throughout the world, and the world is in crisis. The Hopi life⁠—the Hopi event⁠—contains and yields meanings of planetary scope.”</p>
				<p>Here we find John Collier and his wife at their best. The lesson for them⁠—and for us⁠—is to think carefully, and discover if possible the fine nuances of thought, decision, and character which changed an Indian Commissioner, and a sincere and able anthropologist, into apologists for bureaucratic government.</p>
				<p>Until the access of Collier to the Indian Bureau in the Depression, the policy was one of coercion, robbery, military despotism, and subsidizing of missionaries to “convert the pagan Indian.” This was true in the time of the wholesale robbery of the Indians of the Southeast, and their forced removal to Indian Territory under Andrew Jackson in 1828, when the Indian Bureau was in the War Department. This robbery was continued after the Civil War, when Carl Schurtz, a supposed liberal, was in control, and although the Indian Bureau had previously been transferred to the Department of the Interior, it continued under more or less Quaker influence right up until Collier took office.</p>
				<p>The thesis of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Culture in Crisis</i> is that the influence of missionaries, especially Mennonite, has broken down traditional religious beliefs of the Hopi in the villages of New Oraibi, Upper Moencopi, and Bacobi. And, also, that the coercive measures of the government have produced “rigidity and ultra-conservatism” in the outstanding rebel village of Hotevilla and to a lesser extent in Shongopovi. As the white man’s world crumbles, the Hopi are shown to have a world outlook, a faith, and a Way of Life more satisfying and wholesome than that of the ancient Greek city-states or of any modern Utopia. Will the Indian Bureau succeed in demoralizing the Hopi? Will the missionaries, the army, and the cattle and oil men succeed in getting the souls and bodies of the Hopi? How can the Hopi retain their ancient faith, and convince the white men that here is one people who do not live by the white man’s rule of money?</p>
				<p>I feel that the author raises these questions, but she fails miserably in answering them. What is worse, she gives foolish advice, unworthy of an anthropologist. I am sure that she sincerely desires the welfare of the Hopi. How an intelligent person can be so muddleheaded can only be explained, I suppose, by the fact that she has no conception of the basic Hopi anarchist ideal, and her ethical outlook fails to comprehend the essential pacifism of the Hopi. She mentions the latter but does not know what it means.</p>
				<p>Before going into a detailed discussion of these issues, it is well to tell those readers who are not familiar with the Hopi who they are and where they live. (I have heard many natives and outsiders say, “Yes, I know of the Hopi and their snake dances; I’ve seen them in Prescott.” Chamber of Commerce enthusiasts, seeking to draw trade to Prescott, got a group together to perform a snake dance in August, a few weeks before that of the Hopi. They call themselves “Smoki.” They are fake white men dressed up as Indians. They say they want to be sure that the traditions of the Indians do not fade away. They do not need this fake Smoki dance to keep up their spirit.) The Hopi are a small Indian tribe numbering about 4,500, of pure stock and with very little intermarriage with outsiders. They live on about a thousand square miles of desert and semi-desert land on high plateaus (5,000 to 6,500 feet), ninety miles east of the Grand Canyon and seventy miles north of Winslow, Arizona. The rainfall is from 10 to 13 inches, and the mean annual temperature is 51 degrees Fahrenheit. They have lived here for over a thousand years. They work extremely hard to raise the corn, melons, <abbr>etc.</abbr> upon which they subsist. They have never been at war with the United States, have signed no treaty, and consider themselves a sovereign nation. They have no tribal chief or government, each village being a theocracy of its own. They are the only tribe which has had men in Federal prison for refusing to fight the white man’s wars.</p>
				<p>I do not pretend to have as much detailed knowledge of the Hopi as either John Collier or Miss Thompson. (I have given elsewhere in this book my experiences with the Hopi.) With Miss Thompson’s disapproval of the narrow-minded Mennonite outlook, I am in thorough agreement.</p>
				<p>The Mennonites are supposed to be one of the historic peace churches, yet their record of cooperating with the government, in their farcical “second mile” in “Civilian Public Service” camps in the last war, is anything but Christian or pacifist. In forty years, they have not produced one conscientious objector among the Hopi. Hopi objectors were “pagans.” I have spoken to the present Mennonite missionary in New Oraibi, who had formerly been in a <abbr class="initialism">CPS</abbr> camp. Despite this, my feeling is that he did not care to understand the Hopi tradition.</p>
				<p>I visited at length with the Mormon missionary and his wife in New Oraibi, and met them later at the Snake and Butterfly dances. They showed more tact in their missionary endeavor than the Mennonite and Baptist, who would not attend what they called “heathen ceremonies.” Mormon dogma has a special teaching about the Hopi being “chosen people,” but the feeling of the Hopi seems to be that the Mormons “choose” to steal their lands. This is not because Mormons are thieves more than other white men, but it is because they settled nearby, and are the immediate whites who have done the robbing. Mormons are fine people in many ways, but on the subjects of war and capitalism they are ultraconservative. The chief herdsman of the Hopi is a Mormon government employee, and many Hopi feel that he is an advance agent for coming Mormon aggression.</p>
				<p>I visited the Catholic priest on the Navajo reservation at <abbr>St.</abbr> Michael’s. He felt that little could be done to convert the Hopi. A letter from another priest there appeared recently in the Phoenix paper, in which it was stated that there were many fine points in native Indian religion which did not need to be discarded. So much for missionaries.</p>
				<p>This book gives a thorough explanation of Hopi customs, of their clans, dances, and of their especial organic attitude toward children. It is well illustrated.</p>
				<p>While Miss Thompson does not openly whitewash the Collier administration, she does so by inference, inasmuch as she condemns the previous antisocial attitude of the Indian Bureau and suggests that: “recently … in Congress and a change in Indian Service personnel, and also because of renewed pressures toward ‘liquidation’ of the Indians and of the Indian Bureau by powerful lobby groups, the forced assimilation policy, has been revived in Indian Service.”</p>
				<p>It would therefore seem right, at this point, to show that, whatever the advanced insight which Collier had in dealing with Indians in general, and the Hopi in particular, he was the administrator at the time when the two greatest crimes against the Hopi were committed. If he believed that these crimes were unavoidable or necessary, or if he thought they were for the ultimate good of the Hopi, then he was a man easily fooled and of a dim vision. If he knew better, and did not resign rather than be a part of this general evil, then he is a moral coward. General Glassford resigned in Washington, <abbr class="postal">D.C.</abbr> in the Depression, rather than use violence against the bonus marchers, leaving that distinction to General MacArthur and Eisenhower. Ernest Crosby, Judge of the International Court of Claims in Cairo, Egypt, around the turn of the century, resigned when he became conscious that Tolstoy’s Christian Anarchism was the highest ethical ideal. So there is precedent for Collier to have been a brave man.</p>
				<p>The two crimes to which I refer are the drafting of the peaceful Hopi to fight in a white man’s war, and, as described by his wife:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>The Navajo-Hopi land dispute was not legally settled until 1943, when the Navajo were confirmed in the use of three-quarters of the original Hopi reservation which they had upsurged and were occupying, leaving the Hopi the use of only 986 square miles of desert land.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Thus the Hopi were so crowded that their range was overrun, and sheep had to be killed by government order. If Collier did not want to be a part of this plowing under, he should have resigned in protest.</p>
				<p>Miss Thompson must have been a rebel herself in her younger days, for she mentions several times that the insistent fight which the Hotevilla people made against partitioning land to individuals, instead of leaving it in communal ownership, caused the government to cease bothering all the other Southwestern Indians, as well as the Hopi, in this matter.</p>
				<p>Why does she call this same refusal of the Hotevilla folks, to register for the draft or accept government sponsored Tribal Council, as being “inflexibility … probably the most local administrative problem of the government staff.” Does she not recognize a matter of principle when she sees it? She does not want the Hopi tradition to die out, yet the very ones who insist the most on this tradition draw her greatest disapproval. She contrasts the First Mesa people (where Hopi government employees and Mormon converts favor the Tribal Council), who have attitudes which please the psychiatrist, to those of Hotevilla who do not cooperate. Is it the old story of the social worker who marks down as maladjusted, queer, or uncooperative those who will not “adjust” themselves to a crazy world? What about the world getting adjusted to a sane outlook? She admits that Hopi tradition is the sanest outlook on life presented, yet when the Hotevilla Hopi insist on this tradition, she speaks as if they were making up a story to justify their own stubbornness. When Dan and his associate told Congressman Toby Morris that they wanted to meet in the open, in Hopiland, where the sun could be a witness to the truth in their hearts and where the government officials, and their Tribal Council friends, and all Hopi, could be freely heard, this was certainly not being “adamant.”</p>
				<p>Miss Thompson has her wires crossed when she suggests that:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>The Mennonite influences may have played a role in the development of attitudes of non-cooperation and passive resistance at Hotevilla, expressed, for example, in the refusal of certain Hotevillans to swear any oath or sign documents.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Her dislike of the Mennonites has gotten the best of her. Does she not give credit to the people of Hotevilla for having enough rebel spirit to refuse cooperation with the conqueror, without being advised by the Mennonites, whom they despise as much as does Miss Thompson?</p>
				<p>What is radical and what is conservative? Miss Thompson says: “Hotevilla, the arch-conservative Hopi pueblo, stands in a class by itself.” I call them radical, and I guess that is what the <abbr class="initialism">FBI</abbr> and the government thought, when they refused to register in World War <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> and went to prison.</p>
				<p>One can hardly believe that Miss Thompson is serious when she advises the Indian Bureau to develop 4-H clubs, games, dances, plays, <abbr class="initialism">P.T.A.</abbr>’s, <abbr>etc.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Surely she knows that the Hopi have given all these, and more, as an organic part of Hopi life for centuries. The best that the white man could do, compared to the colorful Hopi dances, would be pitiful.</p>
				<p>Does Miss Thompson have any hope that the Indian Bureau and the politicians in Washington will do better, instead of worse? Perhaps she has written this book nearly in despair, hoping it will awaken a few bureaucrats. Then, again, whom could she appeal to if not to those in charge of the Indians?</p>
				<p>There are two attitudes toward helping Indians today. Each side can be equally unselfish and sincere. I have lived for five years near the largest Indian pueblo along the Rio Grande: Isleta. Here, practically a suburb of Alburquerque, where liquor and bright lights have “assimilated” much of the Indian population, nearly all traditions have withered away. For those Indians who have left their traditions, the crumbling so-called civilization of the white man has only added disillusionment to offer. There are those who wish to get Indian oil and minerals and grazing lands. They speak of turning the Indians over to the states, of allowing him to be a free man, and not a slave of the Indian Bureau. What they really mean is that they want freedom to exploit him.</p>
				<p>If there is no community ownership of land, then the Indian is likely to sell his land for a bottle of liquor. They want him to vote and be like a white man.</p>
				<p>The other group is those who support the bureaucrats of the Indian Bureau, and want to make Indians stooges of the government, patriotic and religious as is the white man, but keeping the federal bureaucracy. Do-gooders of the Quaker type may work with both groups, and be used as catspaws by them. Those who understand the Indians, and wish them to live their own lives, are very few.</p>
				<p>Despite the fact that Collier had a greater understanding of the Indian problem than any administrator before or after his time, he is the most hated of all of them. This is because the “plowing under” of animals and men came under his rule. If he wishes to have any moral leadership, he had better admit his mistakes, cease relying on politicians, and appeal to those, both Indian and white, who have finished with this mad, white man’s world and are ready to seek understanding of the peaceful traditional Hopi. When Miss Thompson has also renounced all Indian Bureaus and governments, she can again explain to those able and willing to understand⁠—the Hopi Way.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Debs</h3>
				<p>The following book review appeared in the December 1, 1950 issue of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">The Industrial Worker</i>, official <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr> paper. My friend Bill Ryan was editor of the paper at that time, and thus more radical articles could be printed than before or since his year as editor.</p>
				<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Bending Cross, a Biography of Eugene Victor Debs</i> by Ray Ginger. (Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick, <abbr class="postal">N.J.</abbr> 1949. $5.00.)</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>“There is but one labor organization absolutely free from capitalist domination in the United States, and that is the <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr>, and its headquarters are in the penitentiary.”<br/>―Debs, in <abbr>Sept.</abbr> 1922</p>
				</blockquote>
				<blockquote>
					<p>“There are times when a libel suit, or the threat of one, against a revolutionary paper is the very thing that it needs.”<br/>―Debs, in <abbr>Feb.</abbr>, 1916 in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Appeal to Reason</i>, after the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">New York Call</i> had refused to print his criticism of courts in <abbr class="postal">N.J.</abbr> for imprisoning labor leaders for contempt of court.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<blockquote>
					<p>“This will either be the beginning of organized labor in Colorado, or the end of me.”<br/>―Debs, when met by a group of thugs who ordered him out of Leadville, <abbr class="postal">Col.</abbr> in 1895.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>These quotations, taken at random from this latest and best biography of one of the founders of the <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr> who did not turn Communist or Technocrat, or become a tired radical, but who remained true to the last, shows that courage and class consciousness which is so scarce today.</p>
				<p>The book is notably frank and honest, and tells in detail of the rare friendship and love between Eugene and his younger brother Theodore. The author does not gloss over the fact that Debs, fond of companionship, which among laboring men in those days was found mostly in saloons, was very often drunk, and could make his best speeches when slightly under the influence of liquor. Neither does he go to the extreme of Irving Stone, who, in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Adversary in the House</i>, tried to make a regular devil of Kate, the wife of Debs. Kate was selfish, proud, and materialistic, but she is not the first nor the last woman who has tried to tame a radical and make him conform. My wife and I met her once, after spending the night at Theodore’s, when we brought a red rose for Debs’ birthday. We were not so fortunate as Hutchins Hapgood, who likewise being refused admission because Debs was ill in bed, met him down the street and had an extended visit. (When my wife was a small girl, she had given Debs a rose when he spoke in Milwaukee, and he had lifted her up and kissed her.) One would have to have lived in Terre Haute, or have talked extensively to old timers who knew the Debs family, to know the full truth. Debs never carried on personal feuds with union men or comrades who differed from him. It would then be understandable that he would, upon the return from enervating lecture trips, appreciate the home comforts which Kate thought were more important than ideals, and, upon occasion, openly to praise Kate. This of itself does not prove that she was not bitchy most of the time.</p>
				<p>A detailed description of the work of Debs in organizing firemen and switchmen, and of his great <abbr class="initialism">ARU</abbr> strike and fight with Pullman, is given. I had missed two events in other accounts of this first, one, big union: one, the fact of Army officers in Chicago coming out against the use of Federal troops, and being court martialed and demoted because of their dislike of the army’s being used to crush unions. Second, that the railroads sent fake orders for workers to return to work, saying that other workers in neighboring towns had done so. I had never known of the ex-priest Hagerty, book and bottle companion of Debs during all these years. (He, it was, who wrote the preamble of the <abbr class="initialism eoc">I.W.W.</abbr>)</p>
				<p>Of especial interest to anarchists is the fact that Debs, in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Fireman’s Magazine</i> of which he was the editor in 1885, said, “Legitimate warfare in the future is to be in the interest of the weak, the oppressed, those who aspire to be free. Dynamite is to be a potent weapon in the contest.” The author thinks that, because Debs did not wish to have the Firemen’s union disrupted when attention might be called to the above statement, that he for this reason said nothing, until the last minute, about the injustice of the trial of the Haymarket martyrs. But forever afterward he praised these anarchists, and often visited their graves at Waldheim cemetery. He said in 1898:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>The stigma fixed upon their names by an outrageous trial can be forever obliterated, and their fame be made to shine with resplendent glory on the pages of history.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Debs was a great friend of Altgeld, and openly praised his pardon of Fielden, Neebe, and Schwab.</p>
				<p>In 1925, he contrasted Bryan and Altgeld:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>Bryan was petty, mean, and contemptible … this shallow minded mouther of empty phrases, this pious, canting mountebank, this prophet of the stone age … Altgeld supremely great … in heart and brain, in soul and conscience, had been rewarded with contumely, malice, hatred, and almost oblivion.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Although the <abbr class="initialism">AFL</abbr> did not allow Negroes to join its unions, and the <abbr class="initialism">ARU</abbr> followed that line, Debs always refused to speak before segregated audiences. He fought Victor Berger on this issue when Berger declared in May 1912 that, “There can be no doubt that the Negroes and mulattoes constitute a lower race.” In fact, Debs’s chief hero was John Brown, and his most prized possession was the tin candle holder which Brown had in his barricaded dwelling at Harpers Ferry. When the race riots in East <abbr>St.</abbr> Louis occurred, Debs wrote:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>Had the labor union ever opened the door to the Negro instead of barring him … and forcing him in spite of himself to be a scab, the atrocious crime at East Saint Louis would never has blackened the pages of American history.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>I was especially interested in the account of his time in Atlanta prison. Debs was a deeply religious man, and it is no doubt that the inmates of the prison, only a dozen of whom were politicals, recognized his Christ-like nature. His mother was Catholic, and two children who were older than Debs, and who did not live long, were baptized in that faith. Debs was not baptized. He entered a church once, and swore that he would never enter another. He did when he was married, and here in Atlanta he went to chapel because it was compulsory. The farce of the chaplain, who kept his job only because he winked at misery and the presence of guards with clubs parading in the chapel, so aroused Debs that he publicly refused to attend chapel again. Rather than argue the point, the warden abolished compulsory chapel attendance. A large picture in Debs’s cell was that of Jesus⁠—or Jesus the Rebel, and as he called him: “That Divine Tramp who never had a dollar.” As he was friendly with all, he was also an especial friend of Father Byrne, the Catholic chaplain. This priest sent Debs a congratulatory telegram, when he reached home after his pardon; next day, Debs learned that he had dropped dead.</p>
				<p>The author is in error in stating that Debs insisted upon wearing stripes rather than the blue denim, for no one wore stripes then in Atlanta. I had not heard the story of Debs waving and calling to a man in solitary. (It must have been Alexander Berkman. Upon my release from 8½ months in this solitary, Berkman was soon put in the hole for the remainder of his nine months stay.) A guard put Debs in solitary for this solidarity with someone in the hole. When the warden heard of it, he released Debs at once, saying, “Don’t you know that if the men heard that Debs was in the hole, they would tear down the walls of this prison brick by brick to get him out?”</p>
				<p>When, in Woodstock, the papers said that Debs was being considered for a pardon, he indignantly replied that he had never applied for one, and was due one as a matter of justice, not as a matter of mercy. When he was pardoned by Harding, without any promises “to be good,” the warden suspended all rules, and 2,300 convicts crowded against the front wall of the huge prison building. “The ivied walls trembled with the vibrations of shouted farewells.” In Terre Haute, 25,000 people welcomed him, while a Negro band played <i epub:type="se:name.music.song">Swing Low Sweet Chariot.</i></p>
				<p>I met Debs when I was a young Socialist, in 1912. I had worked with Ruthenberg, Wagenknecht, and Baker in the anti-war movement in Ohio. Here, most of us also belonged to the <abbr class="initialism eoc">I.W.W.</abbr> I had been routed by the party all over Ohio in 1917, distributing anti-war and anti-draft literature. Margaret Prevey of Akron, who was an especially good friend of Debs, who visited him in Atlanta and helped provide bail when he was arrested because of his Canton speech, was also a good friend of mine. After my release from Atlanta, when Debs had just entered Moundsville prison, I was doing nine months in Delaware, Ohio, prison for refusing to register. I received greetings often from Debs, through Theodore, and sent him mine in return.</p>
				<p>Regular politicians, like Hillquit, Berger, and Stedman, and purists, like Daniel DeLeon, tried to get Debs to sign on the dotted line, but he was way beyond any of them. Although DeLeon said that Debs was traveling on a free railroad pass, Debs advised his followers in New York to vote for DeLeon. He attended only one party convention after 1900. His dislike of the right-wing compromisers, and his friendship for Ruthenberg of the Workers (Communist) Party and of Wagenknecht of the Communist Labor Party, prevented him from condemning them. He would not stick to the “party line” of the Socialists, so where would he have been in the changing lines of the Communists? In 1926, when he was lecturing for the Socialist Party in New York, he was invited to speak at a rally in favor of Sacco and Vanzetti. But the party bureaucrats would not allow him, as he was under contract to them. When Emma Goldman told him: “Why <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Debs, you’re anarchist,” Debs clasped her hand and said: “Not Mister, but Comrade; won’t you call me that?”</p>
				<p>The author correctly describes Debs’s character, when he says:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>Many men did big things occasionally⁠—he did the little things every day. When he was traveling with a companion, he carried the heaviest grips, slept in the upper berth, sat in the aisle seat. Men noticed that he never hurried a waitress or a bellboy, never complained about a hotel room. If there was not enough food to go around, Debs got the small portion.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>While Debs might have been fooled by Socialist politicians, who sought office through the glory of his oratory, he was never afraid of supposedly great men. While still a very young man, he rushed into the office of a vice-president of the Pennsylvania railroad. This pompous gentleman said he did not give a goddam about Debs or his union. Debs replied that he did not give a goddam about him or his railroad. They argued for an hour, and Debs was offered a job with the railroad, which he refused. This encouraged men all over the country. <abbr>Gov.</abbr> Knute Nelson, of Minnesota, tried to bulldoze Debs during the <abbr class="initialism">ARU</abbr> strike, but Debs soon had him apologizing. Jim Hill had Debs invited to speak to the Chamber of Commerce in Minneapolis, thinking that he would be at a disadvantage before such wealth. Pillsbury and the others were completely won over by Debs’ sincerity and arguments, and they compelled Jim Hill to arbitrate. Of course, his two hour address to the jury in Cleveland is famous, and here he is at his best.</p>
				<p>Debs was not a politician. He used election campaigns not for office, but for propaganda⁠—and told the voters that, “The capitalist politician tells you how intelligent you are, to keep you ignorant; I tell you how ignorant you are, to make you desire to be intelligent.” And also, “I care nothing about public sentiment. Public sentiment hanged John Brown.” He was, as the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Appeal to Reason</i> said in the 1908 campaign, victorious: “Taft elected; Bryan defeated; Debs victorious.”</p>
				<p>Never elected to office as a Socialist, he overshadowed all of the petty reformers who used the name of Socialism for personal gain. Although not an anarchist, he had that courage and love of humanity of his contemporary Berkman⁠—those qualities so lacking in anarchists in this country today. Although not a pacifist, for he would have fought on the barricades, if there had been any any at hand, he saw, like Gandhi, that it was better to convert the enemy than to kill him. Yet he valued resistance to tyranny above submission, as did Gandhi. It is not likely that today Debs would be fooled, like most pacifists, into writing to Congressmen to try to make men out of them, or in talking disarmament and World Citizenship, but he would be, as he was at the age of 65, a leader in real opposition to war and militarism. While not a member of the <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr>, after the split on Section 6, Article <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, in the <abbr class="initialism">SP</abbr> convention in 1912, his great work in the <abbr class="initialism">ARU</abbr> still remains as the one success story in unionism⁠—not based on laws from Washington, or petty bargaining, but upon all members of the railroads belonging to one union. It is not conceivable that today he would be signing loyalty oaths to hold a job. Although he was not a church member, he was a better follower of Christ than any so-called Christian leader of his time.</p>
				<p>Nine months before his death, when he was worn out, he and his wife planned to go to Bermuda for his health. The New York newspapers made a big fuss about an ex-convict getting a passport. He announced that he would not swear allegiance to a Constitution which meant the upholding of injustice by the courts. Although he was questioned at length by the authorities, here and in Bermuda, he did not waver in his stand.</p>
				<p>Before Debs was a conscious radical, and when he was Democratic City Clerk of Terra Haute in the 1880’s, he showed his rebel spirit by refusing to levy fines against prostitutes. In 1913, when the daughter of a friend was arrested as a street walker, he obtained her release and took her into his home, later finding her a job in another city. Instinctively people felt that this man, who belonged to no church, was practicing that Christianity which organized religion had long forgotten. The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Houston Chronicle</i> said in a big headline: “Debs Challenges Christianity.”</p>
				<p>When Debs died, on <abbr>Oct.</abbr> 20, 1926, Heywood Broun said, when he noticed the great reverence paid to his character by those who hounded him to prison: “Eugene <abbr class="name">V.</abbr> Debs is dead, and everybody says he was a good man. He was no better and no worse when he served a sentence in Atlanta.”</p>
				<p>The only criticism I have of this biography is that it does not include pictures of Debs at different stages of his life⁠—of Kate, Theodore, and his father Daniel and his mother Daisy. The author is a young man raised in Indiana, and, as he is not an active radical, or does not appear to have been a conscientious objector, he cannot be expected to understand the absolutist spirit of Debs. This is evident when he mildly criticizes Debs for not meeting issues, such as the Negro question, by reform measures. Debs was not a reformer; he was a revolutionist.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Mother Jones</h3>
				<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Autobiography of Mother Jones</i>, with an introduction by Clarence Darrow. Edited by Mary Field Parton. (Charley <abbr class="name">H.</abbr> Kerr <abbr>Co.</abbr>, Chicago, 1925. Illustrated.) Review in <abbr>Dec.</abbr> 21, 1951, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Industrial Worker</i>.</p>
				<p>“There’s only one thing to be afraid of … not being a man.” This was the characteristic brave answer of Mother Jones in 1919, at the age of 89, during the steel strike, when a union official felt it might compromise their fight to allow a Communist to put out leaflets in the union hall lauding Russian revolt.</p>
				<p>In this day of weak-kneed pacifists, sentimental do-gooders, and corrupt union officials, it is well to remember this valiant leader who braved coal mine thugs and jails in Colorado, who walked in the icy water of Cabin Creek, <abbr class="postal">W. Va.</abbr>, to give the union oath to miners⁠—this being the only area that was not company property.</p>
				<p>Born in County Cork of a family of fighters against British terrorism in 1830, she was of the caliber to withstand the hardships of the pioneer struggles here of the labor movement, which she joined after her husband and four children died of yellow fever in Memphis. She owned a dressmaking establishment in Chicago, but was burned out in the Fire of 1871. Her first job had been that of teaching in a convent in Monroe, <abbr class="postal eoc">Mich.</abbr></p>
				<p>Clarence Darrow, in the introduction, says: “Mother Jones was always doubtful of the good of organized institutions.”</p>
				<p>Like one of her chief opponents, John <abbr class="name">D.</abbr> Rockefeller, she lived to the age of 100. In her last years, she gave this advice to labor:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>In those days, labor’s representatives did not sit on velvet chairs in conference with labor’s oppressors; they did not dine in fashionable hotels with the representatives of the top capitalists, such as the Civic Federation. They did not ride in Pullmans, nor make trips to Europe.</p>
					<p>The rank and file have let their servants become their masters and dictators. The workers have now to fight, not alone their exploiters but likewise their own leaders, who often betray them, who sell them out, who put their own advancement ahead of that of the working masses, who make of the rank and file political pawns.</p>
					<p>Provision should be made, in all union constitutions, for the recall of leaders. Big salaries should not be paid. Career hunters should be driven out, as well as leaders who use labor for political ends.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>In telling of the Haymarket frameup, she quotes the advice of the Chicago <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Tribune</i> that farmers should treat union men like other pests: put strychnine in their food. She agrees with Emma Goldman that Schnaubelt, who it is thought threw the bomb, was never sought or apprehended.</p>
				<p>In a West Virginia mining district, the only place where they could have a meeting was in a Negro church. One union man had a gun, and the authorities chided Mother Jones for associating with a man who would carry a gun in “God’s house.” Her quick answer was, “Oh, that wasn’t God’s house; that was the coal company’s house. Don’t you know that God Almighty never comes around to a place like this?”</p>
				<p>At another time, in the same state, the union men had paid the local priest for rent of the church. She cancelled this, and held the meeting in a nearby open field, saying, “This is a praying institution. You should not commercialize it. Your organization is not a praying institution. It is an educational institution along industrial lines. Pray for the dead and fight like hell for the living!”</p>
				<p>At another time, near Shamokin, <abbr class="postal">Pa.</abbr>, she heard the priest tell the miners to cease striking, to obey their masters and their reward would be in Heaven. He denounced the strikers as children of darkness. The miners left the church in a body and came across the road to her meeting in an open field. Her wisdom was shown, in 1893, when <abbr class="name">J.A.</abbr> Wayland told her he was entering a cooperative colony, and she told him it would not succeed without a religious basis. Later, when the colony failed and he founded the famous <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Appeal to Reason</i>, she got the first subscribers by going to the army barracks in Omaha. Many years afterward, she received permission from the mine owners near Pittsburgh to get subs for the paper in the mines. They thought it was some religious sheet, and that she was an old lady missionary.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>“The rights and interest of the laboring man will be protected not by the labor agitator, but by the Christian men and women to whom God in His infinite wisdom has given the control of the property interests of this country.” ―George F. Baer.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>This early version of the Big Lie, uttered by a coal mine executive in the midst of the fight of Mother Jones for better working conditions, was well answered by the quotation she gives from Clarence Darrow:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>These agents of the Almighty have seen men killed daily; have seen men crippled, blinded, and maimed, and turned out to almshouses and on the roadsides with no compensation. They have seen the anthracite region dotted with silk mills, because the wages of the miner makes it necessary for him to send his little girls to work 12 hours a day or a night in the factory … at a child’s wage. President Baer sheds tears because the boys are taken into the union, but he has no tears because they are taken into the breakers.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Here in Phoenix the other day, I heard the mother-in-law of an employer of mine tell of seeing, in the early 1900s, a company wagon come along and dump the dead body of a Polish miner, who had just been killed in an accident, into the front door of the company house where his wife and five children remained. Not a word of sympathy, and of course no compensation. In the 1930s, her nephews still worked as breaker boys, and she saw the narrow ledge where they stood to throw out the chunks of shale as the coal cars came along. If one of them jumped the track the boy would be crushed, but then boys were plentiful. This was near Pottsville, <abbr class="postal eoc">Pa.</abbr></p>
				<p>Mother Jones’ distrust of pie-cards such as John Mitchell, who betrayed the miners by ordering the northern miners to go to work and cease supporting the southern miners who were on strike, is shown at a miners convention, when Mitchell was being voted a present of a $10,000 house. She spoke of the poor hovels in which the miners lived, and tore up the petition before them all, in scorn.</p>
				<p>As the mill owners of the south would not employ anyone who did not have a family of children they could exploit, Mother Jones obtained work only on the pretext that she would soon bring her six small children to the mills. Then she moved on to new company towns. The machines were built in the North, especially for small children, who received 8¢ to 10¢ a night for 12 hours labor, shuttling in and out of the machinery. At this time, the Liberty Bell was being moved over the country to arouse the patriotic emotions of a dumb populace, so she conceived the idea of marching these slaves of the mills to important centers to arouse noble sentiments of compassion. On the outskirts of a New Jersey city the police were arrayed against the “invaders,” but when they saw the poor skinny children they were ashamed of themselves, and when the workers entered town without trouble, it was the wives of the police who fed them. Seth Low, the Mayor of New York City, would not allow them to enter the city, on the excuse that they were not citizens of the metropolis. However, he soon allowed them to enter, as the wrath of Mother Jones recalled to his memory that parasitic royalty from Europe had been officially welcomed to the city, and here were producers who were denied entrance. Senator Piatt had invited them to breakfast, but he got cold feet and ran away. President Roosevelt at Oyster Bay refused to see them.</p>
				<p>Mother Jones again practiced the Gandhian principle that people, armed only with determination, can conquer the forces of government, when she led thousands of miners to the station to meet Debs at Birmingham, Alabama. He had been billed to speak at the Opera House, but at the last minute the authorities forbade the meeting. As the great crowd bore Debs on their shoulders through the streets, the police gave in, and the meeting was held as planned.</p>
				<p>In another foray, not quite so pacifistic, she led hundreds of the wives of miners, armed with mops and brooms, and banging on dishpans, to the mine pits, straight up to the machine guns of the company thugs, and dared them to shoot. The precious mules of the company got scared, and ran away. (When there was an explosion in the mines in those days, the question of the company superintendent invariably was, “How many mules are killed?” He was not interested in the men.) Another time, Mother Jones and her wild women were jailed, and they banged and sang songs all night, and kept the whole town awake, until they were released.</p>
				<p>Woman suffrage, prohibition, and welfare were three reforms that Mother Jones derided with all of her will and energy. Colorado had had woman suffrage for two generations, and was the worst state of all to organize. The eight-hour day had been carried, but declared unconstitutional by the company-owned courts. She was deported from Colorado by orders of the Governor, but a friendly engineer took her right back to Denver, saying that if he lost his job he didn’t care. She at once wrote the Governor a letter, stating her rights and asking him, “What the hell are you going to do about it?” She was in the midst of the burning of the women and children at Ludlow, was quarantined in the basement of a house for 26 days, fighting rats with beer bottles and unable to sleep. The pretense was that she had smallpox and was being quarantined. She was also held incommunicado for nine weeks another time. She would never budge an inch. Her battle cry at this time was: <em>“You don’t need a vote to raise hell … You need conviction and a voice.”</em></p>
				<p>In West Virginia, she called for men to step into a dark hall and take the union obligation. This was in order that the company spies would not know who joined. A district official was there, and said that she did not have the proper book with the oath and the $15 for a charter. “Charter hell, I’ll pay it myself, and I’ll make up an oath,” was her reply.</p>
				<p>She was sentenced to 20 years in West Virginia, and called on 5,000 miners to go to Charleston and parade before the Governor. Her parting advice was to go to the hardware stores, instead of the saloons, and buy every gun in town and go home ready to defend their rights. The Governor soon got the idea, and the sentences of herself and the others were revoked.</p>
				<p>The curse of the radical and labor movement today is the presence, in overwhelming numbers, of chickenhearted leaders and followers. The one man who has led the greatest strikes and walkouts in history, who has used the boycott and passive resistance to the utmost, and succeeded, also gave the advice that it is better to use violence against the oppressor than it is to kneel in submission. This Gandhi also told us that his method of nonviolent resistance was better than violence. Nearly without exception, we find pacifist leaders today of the chickenhearted type, who talk kindness and truth and love, but seek to save their own skins. Union leaders speak fine words about peace and cooperation, but do nothing to risk their fabulous salaries. Gone are the days when a Mother Jones, a Mother Bloor, or an Emma Goldman aroused the slaves. The only fight today is a squabble over pensions. Imagine the scorn which Mother Jones would take toward a “loyalty oath.” Imagine her anger at the Freedom Train of a few years ago.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Gandhi</h3>
				<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Life of Mahatma Gandhi</i> by Louis Fischer. (Harpers, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr>, 1950. $5.00. Illustrated.) Reviewed in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Industrial Worker</i>, <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr> paper.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>“We must widen the prison gates … Freedom is to be wooed only inside prison walls, and sometimes on gallows, never in the council chambers, courts, or the schoolroom.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<blockquote>
					<p>“We have now reached almost the end of our resources in speechmaking, and it is not enough that our ears be feasted, that our eyes be feasted, but it is necessary that our hearts have got to be touched, and our hands and feet have got to be moved.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<blockquote>
					<p>“Swaraj (freedom) depended on how good India was, not how bad the British were.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<blockquote>
					<p>“The social revolution could not produce a new man. A new type of man would make the social revolution.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<blockquote>
					<p>“A modern nation is only quantitatively less violent in peacetime than in wartime, and unless one non-collaborates in peace time one is merely salving one’s conscience by non-collaborating in wartime. Why pay taxes to make the arms which kill? Why obey the kind of official who will make a war? Unless you surrender citizenship or go to jail before the war, you belong in the army during the war.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Each of these quotations from Gandhi carries a basic lesson to all radicals, and should be studied carefully in order to understand the message from East to West, picked up by Gandhi from Thoreau, Tolstoy, and Ruskin, and relayed in action to us. He is the one man in this century who practiced revolutionary action, combined with a true religious life, which put organized religionists to shame. He is one of those few, like Debs and Berkman, who had superlative courage and who, his enemies finally understood, was not to be bought at any price. Eleven years before the <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr> was formed, Gandhi was in South Africa making $25,000 a year as a lawyer. After buying a ticket to India, he found that coolie laborers were being discriminated against, so he stayed to help them. It took 20 years, and he led 50,000 of his fellow countrymen in civil disobedience, and strikes in mines, but he won. There are three tactics used by Gandhi which can easily be misunderstood by the average radical, but as they are the basis of his success they should be studied. They are:</p>
				<ol>
					<li>Goodwill toward your enemy, with absolute frankness</li>
					<li>Fasting</li>
					<li>Voluntary Poverty on the part of radical leaders</li>
				</ol>
				<p><i>Goodwill toward your enemy</i>, as phrased by such shadow-boxers as the Moral Rearmament Group and prosperous Christian Scientists, who seem to think that saying “God is love” gives them a license to support the status quo, and the sentimental and “innocent” World Government folks, should not blind radicals to the truth of this idea as practiced by Gandhi. Goodwill toward your enemy, as a tactic of an uncompromising revolutionist, adds to his strength. In the hands of collaborationists of the Civic Federation type, it means a sell-out. The only disagreement is the price which the Judas of labor will receive. In South Africa coolies had to register. Gandhi opposed this, and when Smuts told him this would be abolished and registration would be voluntary, Gandhi took him at his word and was the first to register, although he was knocked senseless by one of his irate followers who accused him of selling out. Smuts went back on his word, and was thus proven a liar. Gandhi proved his own faith and the faithlessness of Smuts. During one of Gandhi’s civil disobedience campaigns there was a railroad strike. Gandhi called off his campaign until the strike was over, as he did not wish to take an unfair advantage of his opponent.</p>
				<p>Fischer says that “Victory came to Gandhi not when Smuts had no more strength to fight him, but when he had no more heart to fight him.”</p>
				<p>At another time, in India, he called off his seemingly successful civil disobedience campaign because some of his followers used violence, saying that they were not ready for victory, even if they did win. He inferred the same thought when political freedom was gained. The fact that Nehru is a politician, and uses violence, and denies freedom to those who contradict him, proves that not all those who say “Mahatma, Mahatma” are virtuous. In Gandhi’s famous salt march, when he left his ashram, afoot, to travel the 200 miles to the sea, and gathered several thousand followers on the way, he advised the government of all his proposed subversive activities. Hundreds of his followers were beaten by the British soldiers, but they never raised an arm to deflect a blow.</p>
				<p>Webb Miller of the United Press was an eye witness, and describes how the bravery of Gandhi’s men broke the spirit of the English officers. Fischer says, “The British beat the Indians with batons and rifle butts, the Indians neither cringed nor complained nor retreated. That made England powerless, and India invincible.”</p>
				<p>In South Africa, he walked the 21 miles to town and back again. The coolies for whom he was fighting had to walk, and he showed his fraternity with them by living as they did.</p>
				<p><i>Fasting</i>⁠—Gandhi’s first move, when he came back to India in 1914, was to lead the mill workers in Ahmedabad on strike for better wages. The especial mill owner was a friend of his, and a daughter of a mill owner lived at his ashram. Soon it appeared that loss of wages was compelling the strikers to return to work. Gandhi went on a fast to rally them, and the strike was soon won. Gandhi said, “One may fast against those who love you, not against a tyrant.” This has not been generally understood by those conscientious objectors in this country, whose fasting, many times, was based on stubbornness, and was intended as a pressure against the administration to release an especial prisoner. Sometimes, it succeeded because the authorities couldn’t stand the wear and tear.</p>
				<p>Easter week of 1950, I fasted for seven days in Washington, <abbr class="postal">D.C.</abbr>, along with Fellowship of Reconciliation and Catholic Worker folks, and picketed the authorities against war and the bomb. I fasted for five days here in Phoenix, last <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 5 to 10, and plan to fast six days <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 5 to 11 this year, and at the same time picket against the payment of taxes for war. My aim is to awaken the hearts of those with whom I come in contact. I know that I am breaking one of Gandhi’s rules, one which he, himself, always broke: “Conserve your energy, both physical and mental, from the very beginning.”</p>
				<p>My feeling is that the average person is so conditioned in dollar chasing, aping the rich, keeping up with the Joneses⁠—aside from reading the funnies and mystery stories, numbing his brain with tobacco and alcohol, and succumbing to various shots for the supposed improvement of his health⁠—that there is little opportunity to break through this smog. But the dumbest person can note a sincere appeal to the heart: this was done most effectively by Gandhi’s fasting. His first “fast to death” was <abbr>Sept.</abbr> 20 to 26, 1932, protesting against the scheme of Ramsey MacDonald for separate electorates for untouchables, thus legalizing this blight on true Hinduism. In this Epic Fast, he caused the most orthodox Hindu temples to admit untouchables⁠—something no law could ever accomplish. He “snapped a long chain that stretched back into antiquity and had enslaved tens of millions.”</p>
				<p><abbr>Jan.</abbr> 13, 1948, he commenced his last fast, which was also a “fast to death,” to stop the Hindu Moslem riots in New Delhi, where thousands had been killed. By the fifth day of his fast, both sides met and pledged their support to Gandhi, even representatives of the Mahasabha, the <abbr class="initialism">KKK</abbr> of the Hindus. He asked the Hindus to pay Pakistan the $180,000,000, which they owed them but had delayed to pay. This was done at once. Moslems who had fled were to be invited back, and be given their own homes, and reimbursed for any losses. Gandhi said, “These things will be done by our personal efforts, and not with the help of the police or the military.”</p>
				<p>His further advice on fasting begins with this sentence, “Eat only when you are hungry and when you have labored for your food. Fast to cure constipation, anemia, fever, indigestion, headache, rheumatism, gout, if you are fretting and foaming, if you are depressed, if you are overjoyed … and you will avoid medical prescriptions and patent medicines.” He was also opposed to injections as being acts of violence on the body. Fasting appealed to the traditions of India.</p>
				<p>Fischer says, “India stands in awe of power and wealth. But it loves the humble servant of the poor. Possessions, elephants, jewels, armies, palaces win India’s obedience; sacrifice and renunciation win its heart.”</p>
				<p>Fasting on the part of Westerners will not win friends and influence many people. One fellow sneered at me when I was fasting and picketing, “Want to be a martyr, eh?” My answer was, “Sure; there are not enough martyrs for the right thing. Too many are involuntary martyrs to war.” This shut him up. He had expected me to crawl and excuse myself. In the hands of those who have a clear-cut revolutionary message, divorced from all personal tie-ups with the Communist or capitalist systems of value, fasting is one of the best weapons to be used to awaken people, even in this country. Pipsqueaks had better not try it.</p>
				<p><i>Voluntary Poverty</i> is not to be confused with involuntary poverty. The gripes of many so-called radicals about “oppression by the rich” amount to nothing more than the “oppression by gadgets” which they think they own, but which really own them, as Thoreau said. My residence in Milwaukee for 18 years proved to me that, from Mayor Hoan to the smallest Socialist ward healer, a good job was all that was needed to divorce a comrade from his supposed ideals. From the time of Terence <abbr class="name">V.</abbr> Powderly, head of the mighty Knights of Labor, whose price for the desertion of his cause was a government job, to the John <abbr class="name">L.</abbr> Lewises, Greens, and Murrays⁠—not to mention the goons of a few special unions who live like kings⁠—to be a labor leader means to live in luxury.</p>
				<p>Says Fischer, “Part of every leader’s equipment is a wall. It may be high and made of brick and a battalion of guards, or it may consist of unanswered questions and an enigmatic smile. Its purpose is to lend distance and awe, and to obscure frailties and secrets. <em>There was no wall around Gandhi</em> … To Gandhi, nobody was an untouchable, neither Birla, nor a Communist, nor a Harijan, nor an imperialist. He fanned the spark of virtue wherever he discovered it.”</p>
				<p>It was the work of untouchables to clean privies and handle the garbage. Gandhi always emptied the chamber pots of those where he lived, proving that he of the second-highest caste did the work of those lower than any caste. This was more than pious talk. He allowed his insurance policy to lapse when he first began his civil disobedience work in South Africa. “Security,” for him, did not mean money or position. It could never enter the mind of an opponent of Gandhi that he could be bribed, for what was there in the world that he wanted that he did not have?</p>
				<p>This appreciation of Gandhi by Fischer comes all the more welcome, inasmuch as Fischer was a fellow traveler of the Commies for so many years. The book is well illustrated, and describes two visits with Gandhi by Fischer. Gandhi knew that many agreed with his ideas, but very few practiced them, yet although he had very strict rules for himself, he was not intolerant toward those who disagreed with him. He did not smoke, but when a Congress leader who was a chain smoker had an appointment, Gandhi always instructed the girls to bring him an ashtray. He said that it “would be folly to assume that an Indian Rockefeller would be better than an American Rockefeller.” He had a sense of humor that is rare among radicals, whether of the “party liners” or elsewhere. When he had tea with Lord Irwin, he took a pinch of contraband salt from a pocket in his homespun garment and put it in the tea, saying, “This is to remind us of the Boston Tea Party.” When told that he should have an injection of penicillin to cure a cold, he said he could cure it in three days by fasting. “But penicillin will cure it in three hours, and besides you might carry the cold to others,” he was told. He replied that he was in no hurry, and to give the others the penicillin. He carried his personal integrity into jail, for when forbidden to write to ashram members on matters of policy, he refused to write at all.</p>
				<p>By those slimy politicians who cannot understand sincerity, Gandhi was called a master-politician. The fact is that he refused to be a member of the Congress Party, when it became apparent that freedom from England was within reach, and he refused to take part in the ceremonies of emancipation, saying that to be free from discord between Hindu and Moslem was more important. He said, “We may foam, we may fret, we may resent, but let us not forget that the India of today, in her impatience, has produced an army of anarchists. I am myself an anarchist, but of another type. Their anarchism … is a sign of fear. If we trust and fear God, we shall have to fear no one. Not Maharajahs, not Viceroys, not the detectives, not even King George.” He also held the anarchist idea of no majority rule, saying, “In matters of conscience, the law of majority has no place; it is slavery to be amenable to the majority no matter what its decisions are.”</p>
				<p>Although he was the one supremely religious man of his time, when asked about the progressiveness of the various religions he answered, “I have noticed no definite progress in any religion. The world would not be in the shambles it has become if the religions of the world were progressive.”</p>
				<p>The action of the London authorities, in disbarring Gandhi from legal practice on <abbr>Nov.</abbr> 10, 1922, is the modern example of the dog barking at the moon. Fischer masterfully draws the contrast between Churchill and Gandhi:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>Churchill is the Byronic Napoleon. Political power is poetry to him. Gandhi was the sober saint, to whom such power was anathema. The British aristocrat and the brown plebian were both conservatives, but Gandhi was a nonconformist conservative. As he grew older Churchill became more Tory, Gandhi more revolutionary. Churchill loved social traditions. Gandhi smashed social barriers. Churchill mixed with every class, but lived in own. Gandhi lived with everybody. To Gandhi, the lowliest Indian was a child of God. To Churchill, all Indians were the pedestal for a throne. He would have died to keep England free, but was against those who wanted India free.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
