<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 13</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2>Chapter 13: Epilogue</h2>
			</header>
			<p>“Do you really believe it?” said the Old Pioneer to me, when I returned from my trip last December and told him that I had been baptized a Catholic. “I sure do,” I replied. “I had a kid brother who ‘got religion’ at a revival meeting when he was 16 and it lasted all of his life. He was a good man,” said the Old Pioneer, and added, “Do you feel certain now, and not afraid?” I told him that I was never uncertain nor afraid since my time in solitary in Atlanta, and the reason I had joined the Church now was to praise God, and for the Communion of the Saints. He had been reading the Bible all winter. He had several versions, including the new Catholic New Testament (Young Orme gave that to me to remember the old man by). Most old-timers around here already know the Mormon Bible, and they either believe it or they don’t.</p>
			<p>One Saturday afternoon, while I was cleaning the Old Pioneer’s house for an hour, I noticed some teenagers on bicycles pass by my shack, to the left of the garage. I thought nothing about it, as people often come in here, thinking this road goes some place, only to find it a dead end. When I went over to my shack a little later, I found all of my papers, books, <abbr>etc.</abbr> piled in the middle of the floor, and some articles of value missing. I had heard of other places being messed up by youngsters. When I told the Old Pioneer about it, he was very angry, and said I should call the sheriff that the kids should be “whupped;” they didn’t do enough “whupping” these days.</p>
			<p>After I had told him I would say nothing of it to the authorities, and would pray for the kids, as I had for vigilantes who had come after me here, in order that they would not get into more mischief, he calmed down. Later, he was reading the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> and said to me, “Every time I read Dorothy’s column I get ashamed of myself in such a big house; why, do you know 100 families could each have a house and more than an acre on this land? Bbut then I’m too old to think of such new things.” Then, as if he had admitted too much, he added with a wry smile, “I can’t see Dorothy feeding all these bums who never work and wouldn’t work. They do nothing but drink. But who am I, a sinner, to tell Dorothy anything?”</p>
			<p>One evening, he told me, “If I ever joined any church it would be the Catholic. You believe it, Dorothy believes it. It is the only church that doesn’t whittle things away into nothing.” I told him that I was not the one to tell him to hurry, for I had been nearly 60 years about it myself. When Dorothy was here, he told her that he had advised me to join the church. Perhaps he had this in his mind to tell me, but he never really told me. He was only glad that I did. He had always admired Gandhi. Although he had never been in any war, he was a great student of history, and knew the details of battle formation from almost any battle you could mention. He knew Arizona history, too, and admired the Hopi. He had met my Hopi friends when they came.</p>
			<p>Three times, in the five years that I had been here, he had been taken to the hospital for several weeks because of his stomach ulcers. Several times, I noticed a light in his house around 2 <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr>, and came over and asked if he was sick. He had spells of vomiting. I wanted to sleep on the couch here, so I could be near if he wanted me, but he felt this would be giving in, and he wouldn’t have it. I had wanted to feed the chickens, or gather and pack the eggs, but he felt this was his job and no one could do it just right. I had taken the morning off twice a week, through February, in order to accompany him to town when he took the eggs to the store on Tuesdays and Fridays and carry them in for him. He had stopped to have an examination by the doctor, and took different kinds of medicine. I had planned to go to the Hopi with Joe Craigmyle on <abbr>Feb.</abbr> 28th, and when I came back he was going to the hospital, but that day he felt worse, and his son took him in. Right before I left, he did show me the details of the care of the chickens.</p>
			<p>I called him on the phone several times when I returned and, the day before I picketed, March 13th, I visited him. I had sent in the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Arizona Sketchbook</i>, by my banker friend Frank Brophy, for him to read, and it was the last thing he read. (Brophy had good-naturedly inscribed it to “The One Man Revolution from a Pipsqueak.”) The Old Pioneer’s ulcers had healed and formed scar tissue which closed the duodenum, so that he would starve to death if not operated upon, and there was only a chance that, at his age of 80, he might stand the operation. He wanted to know about the chickens, and told me to eat all the cracked eggs I liked, “and even some good ones.” He was operated on the 14th, and came out of the ether alright. Several days later, when I had worked all day and all night, and was very tired, and was sleeping soundly, I awoke feeling that something was wrong with him. I prayed for him. The next day his son said they had been called and he had nearly died at just that time. He held on and did not get worse for a few days.</p>
			<p>I phoned Father George Dunne, whose name the Old Pioneer knew from my mention of him before, and asked him to call at the hospital. Father Dunne called that evening, and said something about his being an “old-timer,” who had many things to do yet. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Orme corrected him sharply, saying, “Old Pioneer sounds better.” He then asked to be baptized. A doctor, a Catholic nurse, and a Catholic woman who happened to be visiting just then, were witnesses. When Father Dunne left, the Old Pioneer said, “God bless you, Father Dunne.” Two days later, on March 26, the old Pioneer died in his sleep. Both of the Phoenix papers, and the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">Arizona Farmer</i>, had editorials about his death. While I was waiting in the funeral parlor, I became acquainted with the Secretary and Vice-President of the Old Pioneer organization, recognizing them from conversation I had about them previously with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Orme. As his wife and son and daughter-in-law were Episcopalians, it was thought best to have the funeral under that auspices; they were glad that Father Dunne had been there to give him the peace of mind which he desired.</p>
			<p>The papers spoke of him as being an Empire Builder, and of his fine services to the Valley. But up to the very last, he was just as much an enemy of the bankers and industrialists who sought to commercialize the Valley as he had been 20 years before, when these local papers made fun of his “one-man revolution,” saying he could not overturn the bankers who had control of the Water Users Association. The old man had denounced this control, which they had gained by subdividing big holdings into names of dummies, who thus gave them more votes. He got the rules changed, and was president of the Association for 14 years.</p>
			<p>They forgot to mention that, in 1916, when the <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr>’s were driven out of Bisbee by copper owners, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Orme resigned in protest from the local Rotary Club, which approved this action, saying, “If they can drive the <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W</abbr>’s out of Bisbee they can drive Ormes out of Phoenix. To hell with you.”</p>
			<p>He it was who also told me, when I offered to leave his place rather than have him bothered with tax men nibbling at me for my anti-tax attitude, “stay here and fight them.” He knelt to no man. Now, belatedly, he knelt to God.</p>
			<p>One night, recently, after irrigating for a long stretch, and when I was thus sleeping very soundly, the Old Pioneer appeared to me in a dream. He looked very tired, and not at all belligerent. With a soft smile he said, “I wouldn’t ‘whup’ them, now.” I then awoke. This was not a vision like that of the Blue Flame; it was just a dream, but it was real and full of meaning to me.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
